---
name: puffer
id: puffer
source:
  url: https://conwaylife.com/ref/lexicon/lex_home.htm
  desc: Life Lexicon Home Page, Conwaylife.com
  license: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  changes: []
description: |
  An object that moves like a [spaceship](/patterns/spaceship), except that it leaves
  debris behind.  The first known puffers were found by Bill Gosper and
  travelled at c/2 orthogonally (see diagram below for the very first
  one, found in 1971).
variants:
- pattern:
  - '.***......*.....*......***.'
  - '*..*.....***...***.....*..*'
  - '...*....**.*...*.**....*...'
  - '...*...................*...'
  - '...*..*.............*..*...'
  - '...*..**...........**..*...'
  - '..*...**...........**...*..'
  description: |
    Not long afterwards c/12 diagonal puffers were found (see
    [switch engine](/patterns/switch-engine)).  Discounting [wickstretcher](/patterns/wickstretcher)s, which are not
    puffers in the conventional sense, no new velocity was obtained after
    this until David Bell found the first c/3 orthogonal puffer in April
    1996.  Other new puffer speeds followed over the next several years.
    Many spaceships that travel orthogonally at a speed less than c/2
    have useful side or back [spark](/patterns/spark)s.  These can be used to perturb
    [standard spaceship](/patterns/standard-spaceship)s that approach from behind.  A common technique
    for creating puffers for a new speed uses a [convoy](/patterns/convoy) of the new
    spaceships to create debris from an approaching standard spaceship
    such that a new standard spaceship is recreated on the same path as
    the original one.  This forms a closed loop, resulting in a
    high-period puffer for the new speed.
    As of June 2018, puffers have been found matching every known
    velocity of [elementary](/patterns/elementary) spaceship, except for c/6 and c/7 diagonal
    and (2,1)c/6.  It is also generally easy to create puffers based on
    [macro-spaceship](/patterns/macro-spaceship)s, simply by removing some part of the trailing
    cleanup mechanism.
...
