---
name: honey bit
id: honey-bit
permalink: /patterns/honey-bit
source:
  url: https://conwaylife.com/ref/lexicon/lex_home.htm
  desc: Life Lexicon Home Page, Conwaylife.com
  license: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  changes: []
description: |
  A block and pond [constellation](/patterns/constellation) used in the
  [OTCA metapixel](/patterns/otca-metapixel) by Brice Due in 2006, to store and retrieve a bit of
  data - specifically, the presence or absence of a neighbor
  [metacell](/patterns/metacell).  The "0" state of the honey bit memory unit is a simple
  [beehive](/patterns/beehive), which is also the source of the name.
  An input glider collides with the beehive to convert it into the
  honey bit constellation, which can be thought of as a value of "1" stored in the memory unit.  A passing LWSS can then test for the
  presence of the pond.  If a collision occurs, the LWSS and the honey
  bit constellation are mutually annihilated, leaving just the original
  beehive.  Below is the honeybit constellation with the two reactions
  occurring in the opposite order - test, then reset.
variants:
- pattern:
  - '.*...............'
  - '..*..............'
  - '***..............'
  - '.................'
  - '............****.'
  - '............*...*'
  - '............*....'
  - '.............*..*'
  - '.................'
  - '..........**.....'
  - '.........*..*....'
  - '.........*..*....'
  - '..........**.....'
  - '.................'
  - '.................'
  - '.........**......'
  - '.........**......'
  description: |
    If the pond is not present, the LWSS passes by the beehive without
    affecting it.  Thus a test input has an output for the "0" case, but
    not for the "1" case.  For an alternative memory-unit mechanism with
    both "0" and "1" outputs, see [demultiplexer](/patterns/demultiplexer).
    The honey bit is also an interesting [eater](/patterns/eater) for the [HWSS](/patterns/hwSs) as
    shown below.  An HWSS colliding with the pond happens to create the
    exact same reset glider used in the above memory unit.
- pattern:
  - '..**...........'
  - '*....*......**.'
  - '......*....*..*'
  - '*.....*....*..*'
  - '.******.....**.'
  - '...............'
  - '...............'
  - '...........**..'
  - '...........**..'
...
