---
name: soup
id: soup
permalink: /patterns/soup
source:
  url: https://conwaylife.com/ref/lexicon/lex_home.htm
  desc: Life Lexicon Home Page, Conwaylife.com
  license: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/
  changes: []
description: |
  A random initial pattern, either contained within a small area,
  or alternatively filling the whole Life universe.
  Finite soups probably have behaviors very different than infinite
  soups, but this is obviously unknown.  Infinite soups may remain
  chaotic indefinitely since any reaction, no matter how rare, is bound
  to happen somewhere.
  Soups can have an average density, with results varying based on
  that.  See [sparse Life](/patterns/sparse-life) for a discussion of what can happen at a low
  density.
  Finite soups for sizes such as 16x16 (asymmetric) have been
  examined by the billions by scripts such as [apgsearch](/patterns/apgsearch) to find
  interesting results.  Many new [oscillator](/patterns/oscillator)s and [synthesis](/patterns/synthesis)
  [recipe](/patterns/recipe)s have been discovered, as well as previously known rare
  patterns such as [stabilized switch engine](/patterns/stabilized-switch-engine)s.  In addition, soups are
  used to generate statistical [census](/patterns/census) data, and to decide whether
  specific objects can be considered [natural](/patterns/natural).
  Soups can be fully random, or they can be forced to be [symmetric](/patterns/symmetric).
  The results for these two types of soups can differ since symmetric
  soups tend to create large symmetrical objects at a much higher rate.
  Shown below is an unusual mirror-symmetric soup that produces a
  [pufferfish](/patterns/pufferfish) and nothing else.
variants:
- pattern:
  - '.***..**.***.*...*.***.**..****'
  - '.*.*.**.*.............*.**.*.*.'
  - '..***..*.*.*.......*.*.*..***..'
  - '*.**.***.*..*.....*..*.***.**.*'
  - '.****.*...**.*****.**...*.****.'
  - '.....**...**.*.*.*.**...**.....'
  - '..***...**...*...*...**...***..'
  - '*..*..*.**...**.**...**.*..*..*'
  - '**.*..*...*.........*...*..*.**'
  - '*.*.*...****..***..****...*.*.*'
  - '*.***.**..**...*...**..**.***.*'
  - '..*.....**...*...*...**.....*..'
  - '*****.*.***..*...*..***.*.*****'
  - '.*....*....*..***..*....*....*.'
  - '.**.*...***************...*.**.'
  - '****.***......*.*......***.****'
...
